GAP Safe screening rules for sparse multi-task and multi-class models
Eugene Ndiaye Olivier Fercoq Alexandre Gramfort Joseph Salmon LTCI, CNRS, Telecom ParisTech, Universite Paris-Saclay Paris, 75013, France firstname.lastname@telecom-paristech.fr
Abstract
High dimensional regression benefits from sparsity promoting regularizations. Screening rules leverage the known sparsity of the solution by ignoring some variables in the optimization, hence speeding up solvers. When the procedure is proven not to discard features wrongly the rules are said to be safe. In this paper we derive new safe rules for generalized linear models regularized with 1 and 1{ 2 norms. The rules are based on duality gap computations and spherical safe regions whose diameters converge to zero. This allows to discard safely more variables, in particular for low regularization parameters. The GAP Safe rule can cope with any iterative solver and we illustrate its performance on coordinate descent for multi-task Lasso, binary and multinomial logistic regression, demonstrating significant speed ups on all tested datasets with respect to previous safe rules.
1 Introduction
The computational burden of solving high dimensional regularized regression problem has lead to a vast literature in the last couple of decades to accelerate the algorithmic solvers. With the increasing popularity of 1-type regularization ranging from the Lasso [18] or group-Lasso [24] to regularized logistic regression and multi-task learning, many algorithmic methods have emerged to solve the associated optimization problems. Although for the simple 1 regularized least square a specific algorithm (e.g., the LARS [8]) can be considered, for more general formulations, penalties, and possibly larger dimension, coordinate descent has proved to be a surprisingly efficient strategy [12].
Our main objective in this work is to propose a technique that can speed-up any solver for such learning problems, and that is particularly well suited for coordinate descent method, thanks to active set strategies.
The safe rules introduced by [9] for generalized 1 regularized problems, is a set of rules that allows to eliminate features whose associated coefficients are proved to be zero at the optimum. Relaxing the safe rule, one can obtain some more speed-up at the price of possible mistakes. Such heuristic strategies, called strong rules [19] reduce the computational cost using an active set strategy, but require difficult post-precessing to check for features possibly wrongly discarded. Another road to speed-up screening method has been the introduction of sequential safe rules [21, 23, 22]. The idea is to improve the screening thanks to the computations done for a previous regularization parameter. This scenario is particularly relevant in machine learning, where one computes solutions over a grid of regularization parameters, so as to select the best one (e.g., to perform cross-validation). Nevertheless, such strategies suffer from the same problem as strong rules, since relevant features can be wrongly disregarded: sequential rules usually rely on theoretical quantities that are not known by the solver, but only approximated. Especially, for such rules to work one needs the exact dual optimal solution from the previous regularization parameter.
1

Recently, the introduction of safe dynamic rules [6, 5] has opened a promising venue by letting the screening to be done not only at the beginning of the algorithm, but all along the iterations. Following a method introduced for the Lasso [11], we generalize this dynamical safe rule, called GAP Safe rules (because it relies on duality gap computation) to a large class of learning problems with the following benefits:
* a unified and flexible framework for a wider family of problems, * easy to insert in existing solvers, * proved to be safe, * more efficient that previous safe rules, * achieves fast true active set identification.
We introduce our general GAP Safe framework in Section 2. We then specialize it to important machine learning use cases in Section 3. In Section 4 we apply our GAP Safe rules to a multitask Lasso problem, relevant for brain imaging with magnetoencephalography data, as well as to multinomial logistic regression regularized with 1{ 2 norm for joint feature selection.

2 GAP Safe rules

2.1 Model and notations

We denote by rds the set t1, . . . , du for any integer d P N, and by QJ the transpose of a matrix

Q. Our observation matrix is Y P Rnq where n represents the number of samples, and q the

number of tasks or classes. The design matrix X " rxp1q, . . . , xppqs " rx1, . . . , xnsJ P Rnp has

p explanatory variables (or features) column-wise, and n observations row-wise. The standard 2

norm is written }  }2, the 1 norm }  }1, the 8 norm }  }8. The 2 unit ball is denoted by B2 (or

simply denote

B) by

and we }B}22 "

write Bpc, rq the

p
j"1

q
k"1

B2j,k

2 ball with center c the Frobenius norm,

and and

radius r. For a matrix by x, y the associated

B P Rpq, we inner product.

We consider the general optimization problem of minimizing a separable function with a groupLasso regularization. The parameter to recover is a matrix B P Rpq, and for any j in Rp, Bj,: is the j-th row of B, while for any k in Rq, B:,k is the k-th column. We would like to find

n
Bppq P arg min y fipxJi Bq  pBq ,
BPRpq i"1
loooooooooooomoooooooooooon

(1)

P pBq

where fi : R1q N R is a convex function with 1{-Lipschitz gradient. So F : B N

is also convex with Lipschitz gradient. The function  :

p
j"1

}Bj,:}2

promoting

a

few

lines

of

B

to

be

non-zero

at

Rpq N R a time. The 

is the 1{ parameter

2
is

n
i"1

fipxJi Bq

norm pBq "

a non-negative

constant controlling the trade-off between data fitting and regularization.

Some elements of convex analysis used in the following are introduced here. For a convex function f : Rd N r8, 8s the Fenchel-Legendre transform1 of f , is the function f  : Rd N r8, 8s defined by f puq " supzPRd xz, uy  f pzq. The sub-differential of a function f at a point x is denoted by Bf pxq. The dual norm of  is the 8{ 2 norm and reads pBq " maxjPrps }Bj,:}2.
Remark 1. For the ease of reading, all groups are weighted with equal strength, but extension of our results to non-equal weights as proposed in the original group-Lasso [24] paper would be straightforward.

2.2 Basic properties

First we recall the associated Fermat's condition and a dual formulation of the optimization problem:

Theorem 1. Fermat's condition (see [3, Proposition 26.1] for a more general result) For any convex function f : Rn N R:

x P arg min f pxq o 0 P Bf pxq.
xPRn

(2)

1this is also often referred to as the (convex) conjugate of a function

2

Theorem 2 ([9]). A dual formulation of (1) is given by

n

p pq " arg max  y fipi,:q .

PX

i"1

looooooooomooooooooon

D pq

(3)

where X " t P Rnq : @j P rps, }xpjqJ}2  1u " t P Rnq : pXJq  1u. The primal and dual solutions are linked by

@i P rns, p pi,:q " fipxJi Bppqq{.

(4)

Furthermore, Fermat's condition reads:

@j P rps,

xpjqJp pq

P

$" &

B j,; }B j,;}2

*

,

%B2,

if Bppj,:q  0, if Bppj,:q " 0.

(5)

Remark 2. Contrarily to the primal, the dual problem has a unique solution under our assumption on fi. Indeed, the dual function is strongly concave, hence strictly concave.
Remark 3. For any  P Rnq let us introduce Gpq " rf1p1,:qJ, . . . , fnpn,:qJs P Rnq. Then the primal/dual link can be written p pq " GpXBppqq{ .

2.3 Critical parameter: max
For  large enough the solution of the primal problem is simply 0. Thanks to the Fermat's rule (2), 0 is optimal if and only if F p0q{ P Bp0q. Thanks to the property of the dual norm , this is equivalent to pF p0q{q  1 where  is the dual norm of . Since F p0q " XJGp0q, 0 is a primal solution of P if and only if   max :" maxjPrps }xpjqJGp0q}2 " pXJGp0qq.
This development shows that for   max, Problem (1) is trivial. So from now on, we will only focus on the case where   max.

2.4 Screening rules description

Safe screening rules rely on a simple consequence of the Fermat's condition:

}xpjqJp pq}2  1 n Bppj,:q " 0 .

(6)

Stated in such a way, this relation is useless because p pq is unknown (unless   max). However, it is often possible to construct a set R  Rnq, called a safe region, containing it. Then, note that

max }xpjqJ}2
PR



1

n

Bp pj,:q

"

0

.

(7)

The so called safe screening rules consist in removing the variable j from the problem whenever the previous test is satisfied, since Bppj,:q is then guaranteed to be zero. This property leads to considerable speed-up in practice especially with active sets strategies, see for instance [11] for the Lasso case. A
natural goal is to find safe regions as narrow as possible: smaller safe regions can only increase the
number of screened out variables. However, complex regions could lead to a computational burden limiting the benefit of screening. Hence, we focus on constructing R satisfying the trade-off:

* R is as small as possible and contains p pq. * Computing maxPR }xpjqJ}2 is cheap.

2.5 Spheres as safe regions
Various shapes have been considered in practice for the set R such as balls (referred to as spheres) [9], domes [11] or more refined sets (see [23] for a survey). Here we consider the so-called "sphere regions" choosing a ball R " Bpc, rq as a safe region. One can easily obtain a control

3

on maxPBpc,rq }xpjqJ}2 by extending the computation of the support function of a ball [11, Eq. (9)] to the matrix case: max }xpjqJ}2  }xpjqJc}2  r}xpjq}2 .
PBpc,rq

Note that here the center c is a matrix in Rpq. We can now state the safe sphere test:

Sphere test:

If }xpjqJc}2  r}xpjq}2  1, then Bppj,:q " 0.

(8)

2.6 GAP Safe rule description
In this section we derive a GAP Safe screening rule extending the one introduced in [11]. For this, we rely on the strong convexity of the dual objective function and on weak duality.

Finding a radius: Remember that @i P rns, fi is differentiable with a 1{-Lipschitz gradient. As a consequence, @i P rns, fi is -strongly convex [14, Theorem 4.2.2, p. 83] and so D is 2-strongly concave:

@p1, 2q P Rnq  Rnq,

Dp2q



Dp1q



xDp1q,

2



1y



2 2

}1



2}2.

Specifying the previous inequality for 1 " p pq, 2 "  P X , one has

Dpq



Dpp pqq



xDpp pqq,





p pqy



2 2

}p pq



}2.

By definition, p pq maximizes D on X , so we have: xDpp pqq,   p pqy  0. This implies

Dpq



Dpp pqq



2 2

}p pq



}2.

By weak duality @B P Rpq, Dpp pqq  PpBq, so : @B P Rpq, @ P X , Dpq  PpBq 

2 2

}p pq



}2,

and

we

deduce

the

following

theorem:

Theorem 3. @B P Rpq, @ P X ,

d

p pq   
2

2pPpBq  Dpqq 2

":

rpB, q.

(9)

Provided one knows a dual feasible point  P X and a B P Rpq , it is possible to construct a safe sphere with radius rpB, q centered on . We now only need to build a (relevant) dual point to center such a ball. Results from Section 2.3, ensure that Gp0q{max P X , but it leads to a static rule, a introduced in [9]. We need a dynamic center to improve the screening as the solver proceeds.

Finding a center: Remember that p pq " GpXBppqq{. Now assume that one has a converging
algorithm for the primal problem, i.e., Bk N Bppq. Hence, a natural choice for creating a dual feasible point k is to choose it proportional to GpXBkq, for instance by setting:

k

"

#

Rk 

,

,Rk
 pX J Rk q

if pXJRkq  , otherwise.

where Rk " GpXBkq .

(10)

A refined method consists in solving the one dimensional problem: arg maxPXXSpanpRkq Dpq. In the Lasso and group-Lasso case [5, 6, 11] such a step is simply a projection on the intersection of a line and the (polytope) dual set and can be computed efficiently. However for logistic regression the computation is more involved, so we have opted for the simpler solution in Equation (10). This still provides converging safe rules (see Proposition 1).

Dynamic GAP Safe rule summarized We can now state our dynamical GAP Safe rule at the k-th step of an iterative solver:
1. Compute Bk, and then obtain k and rpBk, kq using (10).

4

2. If }xpjqJk}2  rpBk, kq}xpjq}2  1, then set Bppj,:q " 0 and remove xpjq from X.
Dynamic safe screening rules are more efficient than existing methods in practice because they can increase the ability of screening as the algorithm proceeds. Since one has sharper and sharper dual regions available along the iterations, support identification is improved. Provided one relies on a primal converging algorithm, one can show that the dual sequence we propose is converging too.
The convergence of the primal is unaltered by our GAP Safe rule: screening out unnecessary coefficients of Bk can only decrease its distance with its original limits. Moreover, a practical consequence is that one can observe surprising situations where lowering the tolerance of the solver can reduce the computation time. This can happen for sequential setups.
Proposition 1. Let Bk be the current estimate of Bppq and k defined in Eq. (10) be the current estimate of p pq. Then limkN8 Bk " Bppq implies limkN8 k " p pq.
Note that if the primal sequence is converging to the optimal, our dual sequence is also converging. But we know that the radius of our safe sphere is p2pPpBkq  Dpkqq{p2qq1{2. By strong duality, this radius converges to 0, hence we have certified that our GAP Safe regions sequence Bpk, rpBk, kqq is a converging safe rules (in the sense introduced in [11, Definition 1]). Remark 4. The active set obtained by our GAP Safe rule (i.e., the indexes of non screened-out variables) converges to the equicorrelation set [20] E :" tj P p : }xpjqJp pq}2 " 1u, allowing us to early identify relevant features (see Proposition 2 in the supplementary material for more details).

3 Special cases of interest

We now specialize our results to relevant supervised learning problems, see also Table 1.

3.1 Lasso

In the Lasso case q " 1, the parameter is a vector: B "  P Rp, F pq ni"1pyi  xJi q2, meaning that fipzq " pyi  zq2{2 and pq " }}1.

"

1{2}y  X}22

"

3.2 1{ 2 multi-task regression

In the multi-task Lasso, which is a special case of group-Lasso, we assume that the observation is

Y P Rnq,

p
j"1

}Bj,:

F pBq }2. In

"

1 2

}Y

 X B}22

"

1 2

n
i"1

}Yi,:

signal processing, this model is

 xJi also

B}22 (i.e., fipzq " }Yi,: z}2{2) and pBq " referred to as Multiple Measurement Vector

(MMV) problem. It allows to jointly select the same features for multiple regression tasks [1, 2].

Remark 5. Our framework could encompass easily the case of non-overlapping groups with various size and weights presented in [6]. Since our aim is mostly for multi-task and multinomial applications, we have rather presented a matrix formulation.

3.3 1 regularized logistic regression

Here, we consider the formulation given in [7, Chapter 3] for the two classes logistic regression. In

such a context, one observes for each i P rns a class label ci P t1, 2u. This information can be recast

as yi " 1tci"1u, and it is then customary to minimize (1) where

n
F pq " y yixJi   log 1  exp xJi  ,

(11)

i"1

with B "  P Rp (i.e., q " 1), fipzq " yiz  logp1  exppzqq and the penalty is simply the 1 norm: pq " }}1. Let us introduce Nh, the (binary) negative entropy function defined by 2:

Nhpxq

"

"x logpxq 8,



p1



xq

logp1



xq,

if x P r0, 1s , otherwise .

(12)

Then, one can easily check that fipziq " Nhpzi  yiq and  " 4.

2with the convention 0 logp0q " 0

5

Lasso

fipzq

pyi z q2 2

fipuq

pyi uq2 yi2 2

pBq

}}1

max Gpq


}X J y}8 y 1

Multi-task regr.
}Yi,: z }2 2
}Yi,: u}2 }Yi,: }22 2
p
y }Bj,:}2
j"1
pXJY q
Y
1

Logistic regr. logp1  ezq  yiz
Nhpu  yiq }}1

Multinomial regr.

qq
log  y ezk   y Yi,kzk

k"1

k"1

NHpu  Yi,:q
p
y }Bj,:}2
j"1

}XJp1n{2  yq}8 pXJp1nq{q  Y qq

ez 1ez

y

RowNormpeq  Y

41

Table 1: Useful ingredients for computing GAP Safe rules. We have used lower case to indicate when the parameters are vectorial (i.e., q " 1). The function RowNorm consists in normalizing a (non-negative) matrix row-wise, such that each row sums to one.

3.4 1{ 2 multinomial logistic regression

We adapt the formulation given in [7, Chapter 3] for the multinomial regression. In such a context,
one observes for each i P rns a class label ci P t1, . . . , qu. This information can be recast into a matrix Y P Rnq filled by 0's and 1's: Yi,k " 1tci"ku. In the same spirit as the multi-task Lasso, a matrix B P Rpq is formed by q vectors encoding the hyperplanes for the linear classification. The
multinomial 1{ 2 regularized regression reads:

nq

 q 

y F pBq "

y Yi,kxJi B:,k  log

y exp xJi B:,k

,

i"1 k"1

k"1

(13)

with fipzq

"

q
k"1

Yi,k zk



log

pqk"1

exp pzkqq

to

recover

the

formulation

as

in

(1).

Let us

introduce NH, the negative entropy function defined by (still with the convention 0 logp0q " 0)

NHpxq

"

"q
i"1
8,

xi

logpxiq,

if

x

P

q

"

tx

P

q
R

:

q
i"1

xi

"

1u,

otherwise.

(14)

Again, one can easily check that fipzq " NHpz  Yi,:q and  " 1.
Remark 6. For multinomial logistic regression, D implicitly encodes the additional constraint  P dom D " t1 : @i P rns, 1i,:  Yi,: P qu where q is the q dimensional simplex, see (14). As 0 and Rk{ both belong to this set, any convex combination of them, such as k defined in (10), satisfies this additional constraint.
Remark 7. The intercept has been neglected in our models for simplicity. Our GAP Safe framework can also handle such a feature at the cost of more technical details (by adapting the results from [15] for instance). However, in practice, the intercept can be handled in the present formulation by adding a constant column to the design matrix X. The intercept is then regularized. However, if the constant is set high enough, regularization is small and experiments show that it has little to no impact for high-dimensional problems. This is the strategy used by the Liblinear package [10].

4 Experiments
In this section we present results obtained with the GAP Safe rule. Results are on high dimensional data, both dense and sparse. Implementation have been done in Python and Cython for low critical parts. They are based on the multi-task Lasso implementation of Scikit-Learn [17] and coordinate descent logistic regression solver in the Lightning software [4]. In all experiments, the coordinate descent algorithm used follows the pseudo code from [11] with a screening step every 10 iterations.
6

Figure 1: Experiments on MEG/EEG brain imaging dataset (dense data with n " 360, p " 22494 and q " 20). On the left: fraction of active variables as a function of  and the number of iterations K. The GAP Safe strategy has a much longer range of  with (red) small active sets. On the right: Computation time to reach convergence using different screening strategies.
Note that we have not performed comparison with the sequential screening rule commonly acknowledge as the state-of-the-art "safe" screening rule (such as th EDDP+ [21]), since we can show that this kind of rule is not safe. Indeed, the stopping criterion is based on dual gap accuracy, and comparisons would be unfair since such methods sometimes do not converge to the prescribed accuracy. This is backed-up by a counter example given in the supplementary material. Nevertheless, modifications of such rules, inspired by our GAP Safe rules, can make them safe. However the obtained sequential rules are still outperformed by our dynamic strategies (see Figure 2 for an illustration).
4.1 1{ 2 multi-task regression
To demonstrate the benefit of the GAP Safe screening rule for a multi-task Lasso problem we used neuroimaging data. Electroencephalography (EEG) and magnetoencephalography (MEG) are brain imaging modalities that allow to identify active brain regions. The problem to solve is a multi-task regression problem with squared loss where every task corresponds to a time instant. Using a multitask Lasso one can constrain the recovered sources to be identical during a short time interval [13]. This corresponds to a temporal stationary assumption. In this experiment we used a joint MEG/EEG data with 301 MEG and 59 EEG sensors leading to n " 360. The number of possible sources is p " 22, 494 and the number of time instants q " 20. With a 1 kHz sampling rate it is equivalent to say that the sources stay the same for 20 ms.
Results are presented in Figure 1. The GAP Safe rule is compared with the dynamic safe rule from [6]. The experimental setup consists in estimating the solutions of the multi-task Lasso problem for 100 values of  on a logarithmic grid from max to max{103. For the experiments on the left a fixed number of iterations from 2 to 211 is allowed for each . The fraction of active variables is reported. Figure 1 illustrates that the GAP Safe rule screens out much more variables than the compared method, as well as the converging nature of our safe regions. Indeed, the more iterations performed the more the rule allows to screen variables. On the right, computation time confirms the effective speed-up. Our rule significantly improves the computation time for all duality gap tolerance from 102 to 108, especially when accurate estimates are required, e.g., for feature selection.
4.2 1 binary logistic regression
Results on the Leukemia dataset are reported in Figure 2. We compare the dynamic strategy of GAP Safe to a sequential and non dynamic rule such as Slores [22]. We do not compare to the actual Slores rule as it requires the previous dual optimal solution, which is not available. Slores is indeed not a safe method (see Section B in the supplementary materials). Nevertheless one can observe that dynamic strategies outperform pure sequential one, see Section C in the supplementary material).
7

No screening GAP Safe (sequential) GAP Safe (dynamic)

No screening GAP Safe (sequential) GAP Safe (dynamic)

Figure 2: 1 regularized binary logistic regression on the Leukemia dataset (n = 72 ; m = 7,129 ; q = 1). Simple sequential and full dynamic screening GAP Safe rules are compared. On the left: fraction of the variables that are active. Each line corresponds to a fixed number of iterations for which the algorithm is run. On the right: computation times needed to solve the logistic regression path to desired accuracy with 100 values of .
4.3 1{ 2 multinomial logistic regression
We also applied GAP Safe to an 1{ 2 multinomial logistic regression problem on a sparse dataset. Data are bag of words features extracted from the News20 dataset (TF-IDF removing English stop words and words occurring only once or more than 95% of the time). One can observe on Figure 3 the dynamic screening and its benefit as more iterations are performed. GAP Safe leads to a significant speedup: to get a duality gap smaller than 102 on the 100 values of , we needed 1,353 s without screening and only 485 s when GAP Safe was activated.
Figure 3: Fraction of the variables that are active for 1{ 2 regularized multinomial logistic regression on 3 classes of the News20 dataset (sparse data with n = 2,757 ; m = 13,010 ; q = 3). Computation was run on the best 10% of the features using 2 univariate feature selection [16]. Each line corresponds to a fixed number of iterations for which the algorithm is run.
5 Conclusion
This contribution detailed new safe rules for accelerating algorithms solving generalized linear models regularized with 1 and 1{ 2 norms. The rules proposed are safe, easy to implement, dynamic and converging, allowing to discard significantly more variables than alternative safe rules. The positive impact in terms of computation time was observed on all tested datasets and demonstrated here on a high dimensional regression task using brain imaging data as well as binary and multiclass classification problems on dense and sparse data. Extensions to other generalized linear model, e.g., Poisson regression, are expected to reach the same conclusion. Future work could investigate optimal screening frequency, determining when the screening has correctly detected the support.
Acknowledgment
We acknowledge the support from Chair Machine Learning for Big Data at Telecom ParisTech and from the Orange/Telecom ParisTech think tank phi-TAB. This work benefited from the support of the "FMJH Program Gaspard Monge in optimization and operation research", and from the support to this program from EDF.
8

References
[1] A. Argyriou, T. Evgeniou, and M. Pontil. Multi-task feature learning. In NIPS, pages 41-48, 2006.
[2] A. Argyriou, T. Evgeniou, and M. Pontil. Convex multi-task feature learning. Machine Learning, 73(3):243-272, 2008.
[3] H. H. Bauschke and P. L. Combettes. Convex analysis and monotone operator theory in Hilbert spaces. Springer, New York, 2011.
[4] M. Blondel, K. Seki, and K. Uehara. Block coordinate descent algorithms for large-scale sparse multiclass classification. Machine Learning, 93(1):31-52, 2013.
[5] A. Bonnefoy, V. Emiya, L. Ralaivola, and R. Gribonval. A dynamic screening principle for the lasso. In EUSIPCO, 2014.
[6] A. Bonnefoy, V. Emiya, L. Ralaivola, and R. Gribonval. Dynamic Screening: Accelerating First-Order Algorithms for the Lasso and Group-Lasso. IEEE Trans. Signal Process., 63(19):20, 2015.
[7] P. Buhlmann and S. van de Geer. Statistics for high-dimensional data. Springer Series in Statistics. Springer, Heidelberg, 2011. Methods, theory and applications.
[8] B. Efron, T. Hastie, I. M. Johnstone, and R. Tibshirani. Least angle regression. Ann. Statist., 32(2):407-499, 2004. With discussion, and a rejoinder by the authors.
[9] L. El Ghaoui, V. Viallon, and T. Rabbani. Safe feature elimination in sparse supervised learning. J. Pacific Optim., 8(4):667-698, 2012.
[10] R.-E. Fan, K.-W. Chang, C.-J. Hsieh, X.-R. Wang, and C.-J. Lin. Liblinear: A library for large linear classification. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 9:1871-1874, 2008.
[11] O. Fercoq, A. Gramfort, and J. Salmon. Mind the duality gap: safer rules for the lasso. In ICML, pages 333-342, 2015.
[12] J. Friedman, T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani. Regularization paths for generalized linear models via coordinate descent. Journal of statistical software, 33(1):1, 2010.
[13] A. Gramfort, M. Kowalski, and M. Hamalainen. Mixed-norm estimates for the M/EEG inverse problem using accelerated gradient methods. Phys. Med. Biol., 57(7):1937-1961, 2012.
[14] J.-B. Hiriart-Urruty and C. Lemarechal. Convex analysis and minimization algorithms. II, volume 306. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1993.
[15] K. Koh, S.-J. Kim, and S. Boyd. An interior-point method for large-scale l1-regularized logistic regression. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 8(8):1519-1555, 2007.
[16] C. D. Manning and H. Schutze. Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1999.
[17] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 12:2825-2830, 2011.
[18] R. Tibshirani. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. JRSSB, 58(1):267-288, 1996.
[19] R. Tibshirani, J. Bien, J. Friedman, T. Hastie, N. Simon, J. Taylor, and R. J. Tibshirani. Strong rules for discarding predictors in lasso-type problems. JRSSB, 74(2):245-266, 2012.
[20] R. J. Tibshirani. The lasso problem and uniqueness. Electron. J. Stat., 7:1456-1490, 2013.
[21] J. Wang, P. Wonka, and J. Ye. Lasso screening rules via dual polytope projection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1211.3966, 2012.
[22] J. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Liu, P. Wonka, and J. Ye. A safe screening rule for sparse logistic regression. In NIPS, pages 1053-1061, 2014.
[23] Z. J. Xiang, Y. Wang, and P. J. Ramadge. Screening tests for lasso problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1405.4897, 2014.
[24] M. Yuan and Y. Lin. Model selection and estimation in regression with grouped variables. JRSSB, 68(1):49-67, 2006.
9

