Analysis of Robust PCA via Local Incoherence

Huishuai Zhang Department of EECS Syracuse University Syracuse, NY 13244 hzhan23@syr.edu

Yi Zhou Department of EECS Syracuse University Syracuse, NY 13244 yzhou35@syr.edu

Yingbin Liang Department of EECS Syracuse University Syracuse, NY 13244 yliang06@syr.edu

Abstract
We investigate the robust PCA problem of decomposing an observed matrix into the sum of a low-rank and a sparse error matrices via convex programming Principal Component Pursuit (PCP). In contrast to previous studies that assume the support of the error matrix is generated by uniform Bernoulli sampling, we allow non-uniform sampling, i.e., entries of the low-rank matrix are corrupted by errors with unequal probabilities. We characterize conditions on error corruption of each individual entry based on the local incoherence of the low-rank matrix, under which correct matrix decomposition by PCP is guaranteed. Such a refined analysis of robust PCA captures how robust each entry of the low rank matrix combats error corruption. In order to deal with non-uniform error corruption, our technical proof introduces a new weighted norm and develops/exploits the concentration properties that such a norm satisfies.

1 Introduction
We consider the problem of robust Principal Component Analysis (PCA). Suppose a n-by-n1 data matrix M can be decomposed into a low-rank matrix L and a sparse matrix S as

M = L + S.

(1)

Robust PCA aims to find L and S with M given. This problem has been extensively studied recently. In [1, 2], Principal Component Pursuit (PCP) has been proposed to solve the robust PCA problem via the following convex programming

PCP: minimize kLk + kSk1
L,S
subject to M = L + S,

(2)

where k * k denotes the nuclear norm, i.e., the sum of singular values, and k * k1 denotes the l1 norm i.e., the sum of absolute values of all entries. It was shown in [1, 2] that PCP successfully recovers L and S if the two matrices are distinguishable from each other in properties, i.e., L is not sparse and S is not low-rank. One important quantity that determines similarity of L to a sparse matrix is the incoherence of L, which measures how column and row spaces of L are aligned with canonical basis and between themselves. Namely, suppose that L is a rank-r matrix with SVD L = U V , where  is a r  r diagonal matrix with singular values as its diagonal entries, U is a n  r matrix with columns as the left singular vectors of L, V is a n  r matrix with columns as the right singular vectors of L, and V  denotes the transpose of V . The incoherence of L is measured

1In this paper, we focus on square matrices for simplicity. Our results can be extended to rectangular matrices in a standard way.

1

by  = max{0, 1}, where 0 and 1 are defined as

rr

kU eik 

0r rn

,

kV ejk 

0r n

,

kU V k1 

1r n2

.

for all i, j = 1, * * * , n

(3) (4)

Previous studies suggest that the incoherence crucially determines conditions on sparsity of S in order for PCP to succeed. For example, Theorem 2 in [3] explicitly shows that the matrix L with larger  can tolerate only smaller error density to guarantee correct matrix decomposition by PCP. In all previous work on robust PCA, the incoherence is defined to be the maximum over all column and row spaces of L as in (3) and (4), which can be viewed as the global parameter for the entire matrix L, and consequently, characterization of error density is based on such global (and in fact the worst case) incoherence.

In fact, each (i, j) entry of the low rank matrix L can be associated with a local incoherence parameter ij, which is less than or equal to the global parameter , and then the allowable entry-wise error density can be potentially higher than that characterized based on the global incoherence. Thus, the total number of errors that the matrix can tolerate in robust PCA can be much higher than that characterized based on the global incoherence when errors are distributed accordingly. Motivated by such an observation, this paper aims to characterize conditions on error corruption of each entry of the low rank matrix based on the corresponding local incoherence parameter, which guarantee success of PCP. Such conditions imply how robust each individual entry of L to resist error corruption. Naturally, the error corruption probability is allowed to be non-uniform over the matrix (i.e., locations of non-zero entries in S are sampled non-uniformly).

We note that the notion of local incoherence was first introduced in [4] for studying the matrix completion problem, in which local incoherence determines the local sampling density in order to guarantee correct matrix completion. Here, local incoherence plays a similar role, and determines the maximum allowable error density at each entry to guarantee correct matrix decomposition. The difference lies in that local incoherence here depends on both localized 0 and 1 rather than only on localized 0 in matrix completion due to further difficulty of robust PCA, in which locations of error corrupted entries are unknown, as pointed out in [1, 3].

Our Contribution. In this paper, we investigate a more general robust PCA problem, in which entries of the low rank matrix are corrupted by non-uniformly distributed Bernoulli errors. We characterize the conditions that guarantee correct matrix decomposition by PCP. Our result identifies the local incoherence (defined by localized 0 and 1 for each entry of the low rank matrix) to determine the condition that each local Bernoulli error corruption parameter should satisfy. Our results provide the following useful understanding of the robust PCA problem:

* Our characterization provides a localized (and hence more refined) view of robust PCA, and determines how robust each entry of the low rank matrix combats error corruption.
* Our results suggest that the total number of errors that the low-rank matrix can tolerate depends on how errors are distributed over the matrix.
* Via cluster problems, our results provide an evidence that 1 is necessary in characterizing conditions for robust PCA.

In order to deal with non-uniform error corruption, our technical proof introduces a new weighted norm denoted by lw(1), which involves the information of both localized 0 and 1 and is hence different from the weighted norms introduced in [4] for matrix completion. Thus, our proof necessarily involves new technical developments associated with such a new norm.

Related Work. A closely related but different problem from robust PCA is matrix completion, in which a low-rank matrix is partially observed and is to be completed. Such a problem has been previously studied in [5-8], and it was shown that a rank-r n-by-n matrix can be provably recoverable by convex optimization with as few as (max{0, 1}nr log2 n)2 observed entries. Later on, it was shown in [4] that 1 does not affect sample complexity for matrix completion and hence (0nr log2 n) observed entries are sufficient for guaranteeing correct matrix completion. It was further shown in [9] that a coherent low-rank matrix (i.e., with large 0) can be recovered with

2f (n) 2 (g(n)) means k1 * g(n)  f (n)  k2 * g(n) for some positive k1, k2.

2

(nr log2 n) observations as long as the sampling probability is proportional to the leverage score (i.e., localized 0). Our problem can be viewed as its counterpart in robust PCA, where the difference lies in the local incoherence in our problem depends on both localized 0 and 1. Robust PCA aims to decompose an observed matrix into the sum of a low-rank matrix and a sparse matrix. In [2, 10], robust PCA with fixed error matrix was studied, and it was shown that the maximum number of errors in any row or column should be bounded from above in order to guarantee correct decomposition by PCP. Robust PCA with random error matrix was investigated in a number of studies. It has been shown in [1] that such decomposition can be exact with high probability if the percentage of corrupted entries is small enough, under the assumptions that the low-rank matrix is incoherent and the support set of the sparse matrix is uniformly distributed. It was further shown in [11] that if signs of nonzero entries in the sparse matrix are randomly chosen, then an adjusted convex optimization can produce exact decomposition even when the percentage of corrupted entries goes to one (i.e., error is dense). The problem was further studied in [1, 3, 12] for the case with the error-corrupted low-rank matrix only partially observed. Our work provides a more refined (i.e. entry-wise) view of robust PCA with random error matrix, aiming at understanding how local incoherence affects susceptibility of each matrix entry to error corruption.
2 Model and Main Result
2.1 Problem Statement

We consider the robust PCA problem introduced in Section 1. Namely, suppose an n-by-n matrix M can be decomposed into two parts: M = L + S, where L is a low rank matrix and S is a sparse (error) matrix. We assume that the rank of L is r, and the support of S is selected randomly but non-uniformly. More specifically, let  denote the support of S and then   [n]  [n], where [n] denotes the set {1, 2, . . . , n}. The event {(i, j) 2 } is independent across different pairs (i, j) and

P ((i, j) 2 ) = ij,

(5)

where ij represents the probability that the (i, j)-entry of L is corrupted by error. Hence,  is determined by Bernoulli sampling with non-uniform probabilities.

We study both the random sign and fixed sign models for S. For the fixed sign model, we assume

signs of nonzero entries in S are arbitrary and fixed, whereas for the random sign model, we assume

that signs of nonzero entries in S are independently distributed Bernoulli variables, randomly taking

values +1 or 1 with probability 1/2 as follows:

8 <1

with prob. ij/2

[sgn(S)]ij = :0 1

with prob. 1 ij with prob. ij/2.

(6)

In this paper, our goal is to characterize conditions on ij that guarantees correct recovery of L and S with observation of M . We provide some notations that are used throughout this paper. A matrix X is associated with five norms: kXkF denotes the Frobenius norm, kXk denotes the nuclear norm (i.e., the sum of singular values), kXk denotes the spectral norm (i.e., the largest singular value), and kXk1 and kXk1 represent respectively the l1 and l1 norms of the long vector stacked by X. The inner product between two matrices is defined as hX, Y i := trace(XY ). For a linear operator A that acts on the space of matrices, kAk denotes the operator norm given by kAk = sup{kXkF =1} kAXkF . 2.2 Main Theorems

We adopt the PCP to solve the robust PCA problem. We define the following local incoherence parameters, which play an important role in our characterization of conditions on entry-wise ij.

0ij

:=

n 2r

kU eik2 + kV ej k2

,

ij := max{0ij , 1ij }.

1ij

:=

n2([U V ]ij )2 r

(7) (8)

It is clear that 0ij  0 and 1ij  1 for all i, j = 1, * * * , n. We note that although maxi,j ij > 1, some ij might take values as small as zero.

3

We first consider the robust PCA problem under the random sign model as introduced in Section 2.1. The following theorem characterizes the condition that guarantees correct recovery by PCP.

Theorem 1. Consider the robust PCA problem under the random sign model. If

r

1

ij

max C0

ij r n

log

n,

1 n3

for some sufficiently large constant C0 and for all i, j 2 [n], then P CP yields correct matrix

recovery with

=

p1 32 n log

n

,

with

probability

at

least

1

cn 10 for some constant c.

We note that pendix A.2).

the We

term 1/n3 is introduced to further note that satisfying

tjhuestcifoyndduitaiol nceinrtiTfihceaoterecmon1diitmiopnlsieisnCth0epproro/fn(lsoege

Apn

1, which is an essential bound required in our proof and coincides with the conditions in previ-

ous studies [1, 12]. Although we set

=

p1 32 n log n

for the sake of proof,

in practice

is often

determined via cross validation.

The above theorem suggests that the local incoherence parameter ij is closely related to how robust each entry of L to error corruption in matrix recovery. An entry corresponding to smaller ij tolerates larger error density ij. This is consistent with the result in [4] for matrix completion, in which smaller local incoherence parameter requires lower local sampling rate. The difference lies in that here both 0ij and 1ij play roles in ij whereas only 0ij matters in matrix completion. The necessity of 1ij for robust PCA is further demonstrated in Section 2.3 via an example.

Theorem 1 also provides a more refined view for robust PCA in the dense error regime, in which the error corruption probability approaches one. Such an interesting regime was previously studied in [3, 11]. In [11], it is argued that PCP with adaptive yields exact recovery even when the error corruption probability approaches one if errors take random signs and the dimension n is sufficiently large. In [3], it is further shown that PCP with a fixed also yields exact recovery and the scaling behavior of the error corruption probability is characterized. The above Theorem 1 further provides the scaling behavior of the local entry-wise error corruption probability ij as it approaches one, and captures how such scaling behavior depends on local incoherence parameters ij. Such a result implies that robustness of PCP depends not only on the error density but also on how errors are distributed over the matrix with regard to ij.

We next consider the robust PCA problem under the fixed sign model as introduced in Section 2.1. In this case, non-zero entries of the error matrix S can take arbitrary and fixed values, and only locations of non-zero entries are random.

Theorem 2. Consider the robust PCA problem under the fixed sign model. If

r

(1

2ij )

max C0

ij r n

log

n,

1 n3

for some sufficient large constant C0 and for all i, j 2 [n], then PCP yields correct recovery with

=

p1 32 n log

n

,

with

probability

at

least

1

cn 10 for some constant c.

Theorem 2 follows from Theorem 1 by adapting the elimination and derandomization arguments [1, Section 2.2] as follows. Let  be the matrix with each (i, j)-entry being ij. If PCP yields exact recovery with a certain probability for the random sign model with the parameter 2, then it also yields exact recovery with at least the same probability for the fixed sign model with locations of non-zero entries sampled using Bernoulli model with the parameter .

We now compare Theorem 2 for robust PCA with non-uniform error corruption to Theorem 1.1 in [1]

for robust PCA with uniform error corruption. It is clear that if we then the two models are the same. It can then be easily checked that

set i,j = conditions

p for all i, j 2 [n], r/n log n  r

and   s in Theorem 1.1 of [1] implies the conditions in Theorem 2. Thus, Theorem 2 provides

a more relaxed condition than Theorem 1.1 in [1]. Such benefit of condition relaxation should be

attributed to the new golfing scheme introduced in [3, 12], and this paper provides a more refined

view of robust PCA by further taking advantage of such a new golfing scheme to analyze local

conditions.

More importantly, Theorem 2 characterizes relationship between local incoherence parameters and local error corruption probabilities, which implies that different areas of the low-rank matrix have

4

different levels of ability to resist errors: a more incoherent area (i.e., with smaller ij) can tolerate more errors. Thus, Theorem 2 illustrates the following interesting fact. Whether PCP yields correct recovery depends not only on the total number of errors but also on how errors are distributed. If more errors are distributed to more incoherent areas (i.e, with smaller ij), then more errors in total can be tolerated. However, if errors are distributed in an opposite manner, then only smaller number of errors can be tolerated.

2.3 Implication on Cluster Matrix In this subsection, we further illustrate our result when the low rank matrix is a cluster matrix. Although robust PCA and even more sophisticated approaches have been applied to solve clustering problems, e.g., [13-15], our perspective here is to demonstrate how local incoherence affects entrywise robustness to error corruption, which has not been illustrated in previous studies.

Suppose there are n elements to be clustered. We use a cluster matrix L to represent the clustering relationship of these n elements with Lij = 1 if elements i and j are in the same cluster and Lij = 0 otherwise. Thus, with appropriate ordering of the elements, L is a block diagonal matrix with all diagonal blocks containing all `1's and off-diagonal blocks containing all `0's. Hence, the rank r of L equals the number of clusters, which is typically small compared to n. Suppose these entries are corrupted by errors that flip entries from one to zero or from zero to one. This can be thought of as adding a (possibly sparse) error matrix S to L so that the observed matrix is L + S. Then PCP can be applied to recover the cluster matrix L.

We first consider an example with clusters having equal size n/r. We set n = 600 and r = 4 (i.e.,

four equal-size clusters). We apply errors to diagonal-block entries and off-diagonal-block entries

respectively with the probabilities d and od. In Fig. 1a, we plot recovery accuracy of PCP for each pairs of (od, d). It is clear from the figure that failure occurs for larger od than d, which thus implies that off-diagonal blocks are more robust to errors than diagonal blocks. This can be

explained by Theorem 2 as follows. For a cluster matrix with equal cluster size n/r, the local

incoherence parameters are given by 0ij = 1 for all (i, j), and



1ij =

r, 0,

(i, j) is in diagonal blocks (i, j) is in off-diagonal blocks,

and thus



ij = max{0ij , 1ij } =

r, 1,

(i, j) is in diagonal blocks (i, j) is in off-diagonal blocks.

Diagonal-block error d Cluster2 error 2

0.5 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.1

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Off-diagonal-block error od
(a) Diagonal-block error vs. off-diagonal-block error. n = 600, r = 4 with equal cluster sizes

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Cluster1 error 1
(b) Error vulnerability with respect to cluster sizes 500 vs. 100

Figure 1: Error vulnerability on different parts for cluster matrix. In both cases, for each probability pair, we generate 10 trials of independent random error matrices and count the number of successes of PCP. We declare a trial to be successful if the recovered L satisfies kL LkF /kLkF  10 3. Color from white to black represents the number of successful trials changes from 10 to 0.

Based on Theorem 2, it is clear that diagonal-block entries are more locally coherent and hence are more vulnerable to errors, whereas off-diagonal-block entries are more locally incoherent and hence are more robust to errors.

5

Moreover, this example also demonstrates the necessity of 1 in the robust PCA problem. [4] showed that 1 is not necessary for matrix completion and argued informally that 1 is necessary for robust PCA by connecting the robust PCA problem to hardness of finding a small clique in a large random graph. Here, the above example provides an evidence for such a fact. In the example, 0ij are the same over the entire matrix, and hence it is 1ij that differentiates incoherence between diagonal blocks and off-diagonal blocks, and thus differentiates their robustness to errors.

We then consider the case with two clusters that have different sizes: cluster1 size 500 versus cluster2

size 100. Hence, r = 2. We apply errors to block diagonal entries corresponding to clusters 1

and 2 respectively with the probabilities 1 and 2. In Fig. 1b, we plot the recovery accuracy of PCP for each pair of (1, 2). It is clear from the figure that failure occurs for larger 1 than 2, which thus implies that entries corresponding to the larger cluster are more robust to errors than

entries corresponding to smaller clusters. This can be explained by Theorem 2 because the local

incoherence

of

a

block

diagonal

entry

is

given

by

ij

=

n2 rK2

,

where

K

is

the

corresponding
p

cluster

size, and recovery.

hence Thus,

the error corruption probability a larger cluster can resist denser

should satisfy 1 errors. This also

2ij > C0 coincides with

Kthneloregsunltfsoor ncogrrraepcht

clustering in [13, 16].

2.4 Outline of the Proof of Theorem 1 The proof of Theorem 1 follows the idea established in [1] and further developed in [3, 12]. Our main technical development lies in analysis of non-uniform error corruption based on local incoherence parameters, for which we introduce a new weighted norm lw(1), and establish concentration properties and bounds associated with this norm. As a generalization of matrix infinity norm, lw(1) incorporates both 0ij and 1ij, and is hence different from the weighted norms l(1) and l(1,2) in [9] by its role in the analysis for the robust PCA problem. We next outline the proof here and the detailed proofs are provided in Appendix A.

We first introduce some notations. We define the subspace T := {U X + Y V  : X, Y 2 Rnr},

where U, V are left and right singular matrix of L. Then T induces a projection operator PT given

by PT (M ) = U U M + M V V  U U M V V . Moreover, T ?, the complement subspace to T , in-

duces an orthogonal projection operator PT ? with PT ? (M ) = (I U U )M (I V V ). We further

define two We define

operators associated with Bernoulli sampling. Let 0 a corresponding projection operator P0 as P0 (M

)de=noPte aijgIe{n(ie,jri)c2su0}bhsMet o, ef i[enj]iei[enj].,

where I{*} is the indicator function. If 0 is a random set generated by Bernoulli sampling with

P((i, j) R0 (M

2 P0) = ) = ij

tij with 0 <

1 tij

I{(i,j )20 }

tij hM

 1 for , eiej iei

all ej .

i,

j

2

[n],

we

further

define

a

linear

operator

R0

as

We further note that throughout this paper "with high probability" means "with probability at least 1 cn 10", where the constant c may be different in various contexts.

Our proof includes two main steps: establishing that existence of a certain dual certificate is suffi-

cient to guarantee correct recovery and constructing such a dual certificate. For the first step, we

establish the following proposition. nq

o

Proposition 1. If 1 ij

max C0

ij r n

log

n,

1 n3

, PCP yields a unique solution which agrees

with the correct (L, S) with high probability if there exists a dual certificate Y obeying

PY = 0,

(9)

kY k1  4 ,

kPT ? (

sgn(S)

+

Y

)k



1 4

,

(10) (11)

where

=

p1 32 n log

n

.

kPT (Y + sgn(S) U V )kF  n2

(12)

The proof of the above proposition adapts the idea in [1,12] for uniform errors to non-uniform errors. In particular, the proof exploits the properties of R associated with non-uniform errors, which are presented as Lemma 1 (established in [9]) and Lemma 2 in Appendix A.1.

6

Proposition 1 suggests that it suffices to prove Theorem 1 if we find a dual certificate Y that satisfies the dual certificate conditions (9)-(12). Thus, the second step is to construct Y via the golfing scheme. Although we adapt the steps in [12] to construct the dual certificate Y , our analysis requires new technical development based on local incoherence parameters. Recall the following definitions in Section 2.1: P((i, j) 2 ) = ij and P((i, j) 2 ) = pij, where = c and pij = 1 ij.

Consider the golfing scheme with nonuniform sizes as suggested in [12] to establish bounds with

fewer log factors. Let = 1 [ 2 [ * * * [ l, where { k} are independent random sets given by

P((i, j) 2

1)

=

pij 6

,

P((i, j) 2 k) = qij, for k = 2, * * * , l.

Thus, if ij = (1

pij 6

)(1

between { k}, we have qij

the following iterative way:

qij)l 1, the two sampling strategies are equivalent. Due to the overlap

5 6

pij l1

.

We set l

=

b5 log n + 1c and construct a dual certificate Y

in

Z0 = PT (U V  sgn(S))

(13)

Zk = (PT PT R k PT )Zk 1, for k = 1, * * * , l

(14)

Xl Y = R k Zk 1.

(15)

k=1

It is then sufficient to show that such constructed Y satisfies the dual certificate conditions (9)-(12).

Condition (9) is due to the construction of Y . Condition (12) can be shown by a concentration

property of each iteration step (14) with k * kF characterized in Lemma 3 in Appendix A.1. In order

to showqthat Y satisfies conditions (10) and (11), we introduce the following weighted norm. Let

wij =

ij r n2

and

wij

=

max{wij, },

where



is

the

smallest

nonzero

wij .

Here



is

introduced

to

avoid singularity. Then for any matrix Z, define

kZ kw(1)

=

max
i,j

|Zij wij

|

.

(16)

It is easy to verify k * kw(1) is a well defined norm. We can then show that each iteration step (14) with k * k and k * kw(1) norms satisfies two concentration properties characterized respectively in Lemmas 4 and 5, which are essential to prove conditions (10) and (11).

3 Numerical Experiments

In this section, we provide numerical experiments to demonstrate our theoretical results. In these

esextperi=me1n/tsp, wneloagdno.ptAantraiaulgmofePntCePd

Lagrange multiplier algorithm in [17] to solve the PCP. We (for a given realization of error locations) is declared to be

successful if L recovered by PCP satisfies kL LkF /kLkF  10 3.

We apply the following three models to construct the low rank matrix L.

* B+e1r/npounllai nmdode1l/: pLn=eqXuXallywlihkeerlye.X is n  r matrix with entries independently taking values * Gaussian model: L = XX, where X is n  r matrix with entries independently sampled
from Gaussian distribution N (0, 1/n). * Cluster model: L is a block diagonal matrix with r equal-size blocks containing all `1's.

In order to demonstrate that the local incoherence parameter affects local robustness to error corruptions, we study the following two types of error corruption models.

* Uniform error corruption: sgn(Sij) is generated as (6) with ij =  for all i, j 2 [n], and

S = sgn(S).

p

*

Adaptive error corruption:

sgn(Sij) is generated as (6) with ij

=



n2 P

p1/ij

ij 1/ij

for all i, j

2

[n], and S = sgn(S).

It is clear in both cases, the error matrix has the same average error corruption percentage , but in adaptive error corruption, the local error corruption probability is adaptive to the local incoherence.

Our first experiment demonstrates that robustness of PCP to error corruption not only depends on the number of errors but also depends on how errors are distributed over the matrix. For all three

7

1 uniform error
0.8 adaptive error
0.6

1 uniform error
0.8 adaptive error
0.6

1
0.8 uniform noise adaptive noise
0.6

Failure frequency Failure frequency Failure frequency

0.4 0.4 0.4

0.2 0.2 0.2

0 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7
Error percentage 
(a) Bernoulli model

0 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7
(b) GEarruorspesricaenntagme odel

0 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7
Error percentage 
(c) Cluster model

Figure 2: Recovery failure of PCP versus error corruption percentage.

low rank matrix models, we set n = 1200 and rank r = 10. For each low rank matrix model, we apply the uniform and adaptive error matrices, and plot the failure frequency of PCP versus the error corruption percentage  in Fig. 2. For each value of , we perform 50 trials of independent error corruption and count the number of failures of PCP. Each plot of Fig. 2 compares robustness of PCP to uniform error corruption (the red square line) and adaptive error corruption (the blue circle line). We observe that PCP can tolerate more errors in the adaptive case. This is because the adaptive error matrix is distributed based on the local incoherence parameter, where error density is higher in areas where matrices can tolerate more errors. Furthermore, comparison among the three plots in Fig. 2 illustrates that the gap between uniform and adaptive error matrices is the smallest for Bernoulli model and the largest for cluster model. Our theoretic results suggest that the gap is due to the variation of the local incoherence parameter across the matrix, which can be measured by the variance of ij. Larger variance of ij should yield larger gap. Our numerical calculation of the variances for three models yield Var(Bernoulli) = 1.2109, Var(Gaussian) = 2.1678, and Var(cluster) = 7.29, which confirms our explanation.

Error percentage  Error percentage  Error percentage 

0.7 0.7

uniform error

0.6

adaptive error

0.6

0.5 0.5

0.4 0.4

0.3 0.3

0.2 0.2

uniform error adative error

0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2

uniform error adaptive error

0.1 0.1 0.1

00 20 40 60 80 rank r
(a) Bernoulli model

100

00 10 20 30 40 50 rank r
(b) Gaussian model

60

02 4 6 8 10 12 14 rank r
(c) Cluster model

Figure 3: Largest allowable error corruption percentage versus rank of L so that PCP yields correct

recovery.

We next study the phase transition in rank and error corruption probability. For the three low-rank matrix models, we set n = 1200. In Fig. 3, we plot the error corruption percentage versus the rank of L for both uniform and adaptive error corruption models. Each point on the curve records the maximum allowable error corruption percentage under the corresponding rank such that PCP yields correction recovery. We count a (r, ) pair to be successful if nine trials out of ten are successful. We first observe that in each plot of Fig. 3, PCP is more robust in adaptive error corruption due to the same reason explained above. We further observe that the gap between the uniform and adaptive error corruption changes as the rank changes. In the low-rank regime, the gap is largely determined by the variance of incoherence parameter ij as we argued before. As the rank increases, the gap is more dominated by the rank and less affected by the local incoherence. Eventually for large enough rank, no error can be tolerated no matter how errors are distributed.

4 Conclusion
We characterize refined conditions under which PCP succeeds to solve the robust PCA problem. Our result shows that the ability of PCP to correctly recover a low-rank matrix from errors is related not only to the total number of corrupted entries but also to locations of corrupted entries, more essentially to the local incoherence of the low rank matrix. Such result is well supported by our numerical experiments. Moreover, our result has rich implication when the low rank matrix is a cluster matrix, and our result coincides with state-of-the-art studies on clustering problems via low rank cluster matrix. Our result may motivate the development of weighted PCP to improve recovery performance similar to the weighted algorithms developed for matrix completion in [9, 18].

8

References
[1] E. J. Candes, X. Li, Y. Ma, and J. Wright. Robust principal component analysis? Journal of the ACM (JACM), 58(3):11, 2011.
[2] V. Chandrasekaran, S. Sanghavi, P. A. Parrilo, and A. S. Willsky. Rank-sparsity incoherence for matrix decomposition. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 21(2):572-596, 2011.
[3] Y. Chen, A. Jalali, S. Sanghavi, and C. Caramanis. Low-rank matrix recovery from errors and erasures. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 59(7):4324-4337, 2013.
[4] Y. Chen. Incoherence-optimal matrix completion. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 61(5):2909-2923, May 2015.
[5] E. J. Candes and B. Recht. Exact matrix completion via convex optimization. Foundations of Computational mathematics, 9(6):717-772, 2009.
[6] E. J. Candes and T. Tao. The power of convex relaxation: Near-optimal matrix completion. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 56(5):2053-2080, 2010.
[7] D. Gross. Recovering low-rank matrices from few coefficients in any basis. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 57(3):1548-1566, 2011.
[8] B. Recht, M. Fazel, and P. A. Parrilo. Guaranteed minimum-rank solutions of linear matrix equations via nuclear norm minimization. SIAM Review, 52(3):471-501, 2010.
[9] Y. Chen, S. Bhojanapalli, S. Sanghavi, and R. Ward. Completing any low-rank matrix, provably. arXiv preprint arXiv:1306.2979, 2013.
[10] D. Hsu, S. M. Kakade, and T. Zhang. Robust matrix decomposition with sparse corruptions. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 57(11):7221-7234, 2011.
[11] A. Ganesh, J. Wright, X. Li, E. J. Candes, and Y. Ma. Dense error correction for low-rank matrices via principal component pursuit. In IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages 1513-1517, Austin, TX, US, June 2010.
[12] X. Li. Compressed sensing and matrix completion with constant proportion of corruptions. Constructive Approximation, 37(1):73-99, 2013.
[13] S. Oymak and B. Hassibi. Finding dense clusters via "low rank+ sparse" decomposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1104.5186, 2011.
[14] Y. Chen, S. Sanghavi, and H. Xu. Clustering sparse graphs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), pages 2204-2212, Lake Tahoe, Nevada, US, December 2012.
[15] Y. Chen, S. Sanghavi, and H. Xu. Improved graph clustering. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 60(10):6440-6455, Oct 2014.
[16] Y. Chen, A. Jalali, S. Sanghavi, and H. Xu. Clustering partially observed graphs via convex optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(1):2213-2238, 2014.
[17] Z. Lin, M. Chen, and Y. Ma. The augmented lagrange multiplier method for exact recovery of corrupted low-rank matrices. arXiv preprint arXiv:1009.5055, 2010.
[18] N. Srebro and R. R. Salakhutdinov. Collaborative filtering in a non-uniform world: Learning with the weighted trace norm. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), pages 2056-2064, Hyatt Regency, Vancouver, Canada, 2010. December.
[19] R. Vershynin. Introduction to the non-asymptotic analysis of random matrices. arXiv preprint arXiv:1011.3027, 2010.
[20] J. A. Tropp. User-friendly tail bounds for sums of random matrices. Foundations of Computational Mathematics, 12(4):389-434, 2012.
9

